I grew up near New Bedford, Massachusetts.
My family is originally from the Azores and Scotland.
It's not easy being different, especially when you're young.
When you're deaf, your whole world depends on sight.
Well, James was born deaf and that was difficult enough to have to learn how to cope with
and how to teach him and how to help him.
And then shortly after that, when he was about seven years old, we noticed that his eyesight
was feeling.
The first time we went to the doctor, they were really able to tell much, except that
he wasn't doing good with the eye shot, being alone, was one of the challenges James
faced.
I'm losing some of the friends he used to play with, that he no longer could play with.
I lost my sight at age 8 because of a retinal detachment.
I felt frustrated and bitter.
When I enter a place, I begin to feel around the room.
I make a mountain picture where everything is so that I can move around freely.
Sometimes people are surprised with what interests me.
I can enjoy activities just like any other person.
I have a heightened sense of touch.
I see things with my hands.
James approaches life in a more sensitive contemplative way because light is not a part
of his experience, but it doesn't change the ability that he has to learn from the same
things that we all learn from.
Learning to read Braille was a very important step in my life.
I was in June of 1976.
I remember traveling to Perkins for my interview.
I was so nervous and I wasn't sure what it was going to be like.
I worked with JR for 12 years.
Someone who is totally deaf-blind is really isolated from everything around them unless you're
in immediate contact with them.
I was taught how to use my hands so that I could function without the use of my eyes.
I learned how to read Braille in English and I was taught American Sign Language.
These helped me to communicate with others.
I've always been interested in the universe, the stars, the planets, and their moons.
I was always asking who made people the ocean and the trees, the ground, and everything
around us.
I try to understand my surroundings by touch, smell and taste.
I can't see light, but I can sense the warmth of the sun on my skin.
When I was 10 years old, I received my first copy of the Bible in Braille.
It gives me comfort and teaches me so many things.
The carvings that I collect are for me the same as pictures you may hang in your home.
I employ James two days a week to be our chef.
He has a strong, strong faith in God and I think that has gotten him through a lot of struggles.
Attending the Kingdom Hall keeps me positive.
These are places of worship for Jehovah's Witnesses.
I have friends there that are just like family.
I'm assigned to work with the literature.
I deliver magazines and DVDs to the brothers.
I can recognize people just by the touch of their hands.
Conventions are special times of the year.
I get to be around people just like me.
We receive spiritual instruction as well as new publications in Braille.
No matter if you're blind or deaf or can see in here,
it's important to develop our ability to reason and use our imagination.
Well, you know, I have always said that if God says to me,
these are the children and you can pick which baby will be yours.
This one's going to be a football player.
This one's going to be a movie star.
This one's going to be deaf and blind.
I never would have picked James.
And I would have missed out on having the best son in the world.
Finding out who my creator is and that I can have a relationship with him
gave my life a sense of purpose.
I feel like I've gained much more than I've ever lost.